The President:
Over the past few decades, there has been an intense struggle in
Washington between the lobbyists
for the insurance industry and
the interests of the American
people over what's been called
a Patient's Bill of Rights
-- a set of rules to protect
Americans from some of the
worst practices of the health
insurance industry; rules to ensure that all Americans are
getting the care they need from their doctors and the care they
deserve from their
insurance companies.
The last time a Patient's Bill
of Rights was within reach was
roughly a decade ago, and it
was supported by Democrats and
Republicans alike, from
Ted Kennedy to John McCain.
It included the right to an
appeals process so you could
challenge an unfair decision by
an insurance company before a
third party.
It included the right to
choose your own doctor.
It included the right to access
information about what your
health insurance
plan means for you.
And it called for a new level
of transparency so that patients
would know if their doctor had
a conflict of interest when
providing services.
Now, this Patient's Bill of
Rights never made it into law.
It fell victim --
again and again --
to the same special interest
lobbying that has blocked
passage of health insurance
reform for so many decades.
But today, we're being given
another chance to make it a
reality, because each of
these rights, and many more,
are incorporated in the health
insurance reform bill that
recently passed the House of
Representatives and in the bill
that is currently making
its way through the Senate.
Both the House and the Senate bills would make it against the
law for insurance companies to deny you coverage on the basis
of a pre-existing
condition or illness.
Both would stop insurers from
charging exorbitant premiums on
the basis of age,
health, or gender.
Both would prevent insurance
companies from dropping your
coverage when you get sick.
And both would put a limit on
how much you have to pay out of
pocket for the treatments you
need in a year or lifetime.
Simply put, the protections
currently included in both the
health insurance reform bill
passed by the House and the
version currently on the Senate
floor would represent the
toughest measures we've ever
taken to hold the insurance
industry accountable.
Anyone who says otherwise
simply hasn't read the bills.
Just open these proposals at
random and you'll find on almost
any page patient protections
that dwarf any of those passed
by Congress in at
least a decade.
These protections are just one
part of a landmark reform that
will finally reduce the
cost of health care.
When it becomes law, families
will save on their premiums.
Small businesses and Americans
who don't get any insurance
today through their employers
will no longer be forced to pay
punishingly high
rates to get coverage.
This legislation will also
strengthen Medicare and extend
the life of the program, while
saving senior citizens hundreds
of dollars a year in
prescription costs.
And reforms to target
waste, inefficiency,
and price-gouging by the
insurance industry will help
make this the largest deficit
reduction plan in over a decade.
The insurance industry
knows all this.
That's why they're at it again,
using their muscle in Washington
to try to block a vote that
they know they will lose.
They're lobbying.
They're running ads.
They're spending millions of
dollars to kill health insurance
reform, just like they've
done so many times before.
They want to preserve a system
that works better for the
insurance industry than it
does for the American people.
But now -- for the first time -- there is a clear majority in the
Senate that's willing to stand up to the insurance lobby and
embrace lasting health insurance reforms that have eluded us for generations.
The question is whether the
minority that opposes these
reforms will continue to use
parliamentary maneuvers to try
and stop the Senate
from voting on them.
Whatever their position on
health insurance reform,
Senators ought to allow
an up or down vote.
Let's bring this long and
vigorous debate to an end.
Let's deliver on the promise of
health insurance reforms that
will make our people healthier,
our economy stronger,
and our future more secure.
And as this difficult
year comes to a close,
let's show the American people
that we are equal to the task of
meeting our great challenges.
Thanks for listening, and on
behalf of Michelle, Malia,
Sasha, and Bo, happy holidays,
from our family to yours.